README.md, before:

# SuperTML for HiggsML

Attempting to reproduce the results of [SuperTML - Sun et al., 2019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.06246) for the [Higgs ML Kaggle Challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/c/higgs-boson) using data from [CERN OpenData](http://opendata.cern.ch/record/328).

[This](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/presentations/GS_CMSML_SuperTML.pdf) progress presentation was presented at the 3rd CMS Macine Learning workshop at CERN on 19/06/19.

## Process

### Pre-processing and image creation 

#### As text ([image_formatter.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/image_formatter.ipynb))

- Tabula data is pre-processed to:
  - Fix event orientation in phi, x, and z
  - Convert 3-momenta to Cartesian coordinates
- Events converted to 224x224 images by printing feature values as floats (3 d.p. precision) as text on black backgrounds

#### As pixels ([image_formatter_pixels.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/image_formatter_pixels.ipynb))

- Tabula data is pre-processed to:
  - Fix event orientation in phi, x, and z
  - Convert 3-momenta to Cartesian coordinates
- Events converted to 224x224 images by colouring blocks of pixels according to feature values

### Classifier training, e.g. [2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb)

- CNN classifier constructed using Resnet34 pretrained on ImageNet as a backbone
- CNN is refined on training data in two stages:
  - 1st stage only trains final two dense layers
  - 2nd stage unfreezes and trains entire network (with discriminative learning rates)

### Inference, e.g. [2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb)

- Refined CNN applied to validation data
- Predictions converted to 1D prediction (zero = background, 1 = signal)
- AMS values calculated
- Cut on prediction chosen by taking the mean cut corresponding to the top 10% of AMS values
- Classifier applied to test data and AMS at chosen cut is evaluated

## Results

- First attempt:
  - equal fontisize
  - 224x224 images
  - Resnet34
  - Training does not account for event weights or balance classes
  - With no explicit regularisation, training-validation performance shows slight overtraining towards end, error rate bottoms out at ~17.5%
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 2.91, AMS at chosen cut is 2.80
  - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.79-2.74
  - Appears to be better than random guessing, but currently worse than traditional binary classification and no where near the 3.979 reported

- Second attempt:
  - Moved to ariel 13 for font (text on previous images were a bit pixelated)
  - Shortened 2nd stage of training
  - Slightly improved performance:
    - min validation error-rate ~17%
    - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.10, AMS at chosen cut is 3.02
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.78-2.83
  - Slight improvements with cleaner text labels, but still bad performance

- Third attempt
  - Encoded data as blocks of different pixel intensities by passing standardised & normalised data through a sigmoid and timesing by 255
  - Encoding was quicker and image file size was smaller (13 GB --> 9 GB)
  - Training slightly imporved: 16% error rate
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.62, AMS at chosen cut is 3.44
  - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.29-3.32
  - Better encoding, but performance still worse than a 4-layer ReLU FCNN

- Fourth attempt
  - Same as third attempt, but using train-time data augmentation to adjust the contrast and brightness slightly during training
  - Training slightly worsened, but still around a 16% error rate
  - Similar validation performance: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.61, AMS at chosen cut is 3.45
  - Similar test performance: Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.24-3.36
  - Running test-time data augmentation worsened results considerably

- Fifth attempt
  - Removed data augmentation
  - Moved to SE-net 50
  - ~15.7% error rate for a 2 times increase in train time (had to halve batch size)
  - Improved validation performance: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.71, AMS at chosen cut is 3.59
  - Improved test performance: Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.35-3.48

- Sixth attempt
  - Moved to using SE-net 154 (same model used in paper)
  - Same error rate as SE-net 50 (15.67%) for a 4.2 times in crease in train time
  - Slight improvement for validation data: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.72, AMS at chosen cut is 3.64
  - Improved test performance:
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.50-3.48
    - Public-private AMS on test data at max cut    = 3.49-3.52
  - Tested maximising AMS on test data: Maximum public : `private AMS = 3.50 : 3.52
  - Tested maximising AMS on subsamples of test data: Maximum maximised public : private AMS  over 10 subsamples = 5.79	3.87

- Seventh attempt
  - Moved back to using SE-net 50
  - Encoded data as block rather than thin rectangles
  - Reduced image dimension to 56x56
  - Slighlty higher error rate than previous SE-net 50 result (15.9% c.f. 15.7) but a 90% reduction in traintime due to higher batch-size
  - Slight lower for validation data: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.66, AMS at chosen cut is 3.44
  - Test performance:
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.30-3.41
    - Public-private AMS on test data at max cut    = 3.40-3.48
  - Maximum public : `private AMS = 3.45 : 3.49
  - Maximum maximised public : private AMS over 10 subsamples = 5.43	3.68

- Eighth attempt
  - Playing around with different ordering schemes

- Contact with authors 10/07/19:
  - Is code publically available? = no answer
  - Training and testing sizes? = Confirmed 250,000 training and 550,000 testing; difference in paper was a typo
  - How is the cut optimised, on validation or testing? = no answer
  - Is weight used as input feature? = No
  - How is pretrained model altered? =  Confirmed single stage training and only output layer of model was altered

- Ninth attempt
  - Moving back to text encoding, SE-Net 154, and 224x224 images
  - Removed additional dense layers and ran single stage training as per authors' suggestion
  - 17.5% error rate on validation sample during training = on par with ResNet34
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.25, AMS at chosen cut is 3.11
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.95-2.95
    - Maximum public-private AMS on test data = 3.00-3.04

- Contact with authors 17/07/19 (replied 23/01/20):
  - How is the cut optimised, on validation or testing? = no answer
  - Are the private and public subsets of the test data extracted and the AMS computed on each, or is a single AMS computed on the entire test dataset without reweighting? = no answer
  - Authors pointed to https://github.com/EmjayAhn/SuperTML-pytorch which tests SuperTML on iris dataset and achieves 97% accuracy (paper reports 93% accuracy). Suggested I try my implementation on iris to rule out problems in image preparation.
    - Over several emails I requested they check their usage of the testing set (full usage when computing AMS gives double the integrated luminosity = ~sqrt(2) increase in AMS (sqrt(2)*2.95 = 4.17, i.e. consistent with claimed 3.979))
    - Agreed to test my implementation on Iris dataset

- Iris tests:
  - Baseline: Out-of-the-box SKLearn Random Forest = 97% validation accuracy.
  - SuperTML: ImageNet-pretrained ResNet34 = 97% validation accuracy (with and without initial frozen training)
  - SuperTML: Randomly initialised ResNet34 = 97% validation accuracy
  - SuperTML: ImageNet-pretrained ResNet34 and randomly shuffled targets of data. 23% validation accuracy (expected 33%) - indicates method does actually learn something during training, rather than memorising data.

## Requirements

- Python >= 3.6
- [fastai](https://github.com/fastai/fastai) > 1.0 - CNN training & inference
- [lumin](https://github.com/GilesStrong/lumin) == 0.2 - data processing, scoring

Commit message:

readme update for double lumi

README.md, after:

# SuperTML for HiggsML

Attempting to reproduce the results of [SuperTML - Sun et al., 2019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.06246) for the [Higgs ML Kaggle Challenge](https://www.kaggle.com/c/higgs-boson) using data from [CERN OpenData](http://opendata.cern.ch/record/328).

[This](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/presentations/GS_CMSML_SuperTML.pdf) progress presentation was presented at the 3rd CMS Macine Learning workshop at CERN on 19/06/19.

## Process

### Pre-processing and image creation 

#### As text ([image_formatter.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/image_formatter.ipynb))

- Tabula data is pre-processed to:
  - Fix event orientation in phi, x, and z
  - Convert 3-momenta to Cartesian coordinates
- Events converted to 224x224 images by printing feature values as floats (3 d.p. precision) as text on black backgrounds

#### As pixels ([image_formatter_pixels.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/image_formatter_pixels.ipynb))

- Tabula data is pre-processed to:
  - Fix event orientation in phi, x, and z
  - Convert 3-momenta to Cartesian coordinates
- Events converted to 224x224 images by colouring blocks of pixels according to feature values

### Classifier training, e.g. [2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb)

- CNN classifier constructed using Resnet34 pretrained on ImageNet as a backbone
- CNN is refined on training data in two stages:
  - 1st stage only trains final two dense layers
  - 2nd stage unfreezes and trains entire network (with discriminative learning rates)

### Inference, e.g. [2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb](https://github.com/GilesStrong/SuperTML_HiggsML_Test/blob/master/notebooks/2_resnet34_data-fix_Pixels-224.ipynb)

- Refined CNN applied to validation data
- Predictions converted to 1D prediction (zero = background, 1 = signal)
- AMS values calculated
- Cut on prediction chosen by taking the mean cut corresponding to the top 10% of AMS values
- Classifier applied to test data and AMS at chosen cut is evaluated

## Results

- First attempt:
  - equal fontisize
  - 224x224 images
  - Resnet34
  - Training does not account for event weights or balance classes
  - With no explicit regularisation, training-validation performance shows slight overtraining towards end, error rate bottoms out at ~17.5%
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 2.91, AMS at chosen cut is 2.80
  - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.79-2.74
  - Appears to be better than random guessing, but currently worse than traditional binary classification and no where near the 3.979 reported

- Second attempt:
  - Moved to ariel 13 for font (text on previous images were a bit pixelated)
  - Shortened 2nd stage of training
  - Slightly improved performance:
    - min validation error-rate ~17%
    - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.10, AMS at chosen cut is 3.02
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.78-2.83
  - Slight improvements with cleaner text labels, but still bad performance

- Third attempt
  - Encoded data as blocks of different pixel intensities by passing standardised & normalised data through a sigmoid and timesing by 255
  - Encoding was quicker and image file size was smaller (13 GB --> 9 GB)
  - Training slightly imporved: 16% error rate
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.62, AMS at chosen cut is 3.44
  - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.29-3.32
  - Better encoding, but performance still worse than a 4-layer ReLU FCNN

- Fourth attempt
  - Same as third attempt, but using train-time data augmentation to adjust the contrast and brightness slightly during training
  - Training slightly worsened, but still around a 16% error rate
  - Similar validation performance: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.61, AMS at chosen cut is 3.45
  - Similar test performance: Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.24-3.36
  - Running test-time data augmentation worsened results considerably

- Fifth attempt
  - Removed data augmentation
  - Moved to SE-net 50
  - ~15.7% error rate for a 2 times increase in train time (had to halve batch size)
  - Improved validation performance: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.71, AMS at chosen cut is 3.59
  - Improved test performance: Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.35-3.48

- Sixth attempt
  - Moved to using SE-net 154 (same model used in paper)
  - Same error rate as SE-net 50 (15.67%) for a 4.2 times in crease in train time
  - Slight improvement for validation data: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.72, AMS at chosen cut is 3.64
  - Improved test performance:
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.50-3.48
    - Public-private AMS on test data at max cut    = 3.49-3.52
  - Tested maximising AMS on test data: Maximum public : `private AMS = 3.50 : 3.52
  - Tested maximising AMS on subsamples of test data: Maximum maximised public : private AMS  over 10 subsamples = 5.79	3.87

- Seventh attempt
  - Moved back to using SE-net 50
  - Encoded data as block rather than thin rectangles
  - Reduced image dimension to 56x56
  - Slighlty higher error rate than previous SE-net 50 result (15.9% c.f. 15.7) but a 90% reduction in traintime due to higher batch-size
  - Slight lower for validation data: Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.66, AMS at chosen cut is 3.44
  - Test performance:
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 3.30-3.41
    - Public-private AMS on test data at max cut    = 3.40-3.48
  - Maximum public : `private AMS = 3.45 : 3.49
  - Maximum maximised public : private AMS over 10 subsamples = 5.43	3.68

- Eighth attempt
  - Playing around with different ordering schemes

- Contact with authors 10/07/19:
  - Is code publically available? = no answer
  - Training and testing sizes? = Confirmed 250,000 training and 550,000 testing; difference in paper was a typo
  - How is the cut optimised, on validation or testing? = no answer
  - Is weight used as input feature? = No
  - How is pretrained model altered? =  Confirmed single stage training and only output layer of model was altered

- Ninth attempt
  - Moving back to text encoding, SE-Net 154, and 224x224 images
  - Removed additional dense layers and ran single stage training as per authors' suggestion
  - 17.5% error rate on validation sample during training = on par with ResNet34
  - Maximum AMS on validation data is 3.25, AMS at chosen cut is 3.11
    - Public-private AMS on test data at chosen cut = 2.95-2.95
    - Maximum public-private AMS on test data = 3.00-3.04

- Contact with authors 17/07/19 (replied 23/01/20):
  - How is the cut optimised, on validation or testing? = no answer
  - Are the private and public subsets of the test data extracted and the AMS computed on each, or is a single AMS computed on the entire test dataset without reweighting? = no answer
  - Authors pointed to https://github.com/EmjayAhn/SuperTML-pytorch which tests SuperTML on iris dataset and achieves 97% accuracy (paper reports 93% accuracy). Suggested I try my implementation on iris to rule out problems in image preparation.
    - Over several emails I requested they check their usage of the testing set (full usage when computing AMS gives double the integrated luminosity = ~sqrt(2) increase in AMS (sqrt(2)*2.95 = 4.17, i.e. consistent with claimed 3.979))
    - Agreed to test my implementation on Iris dataset

- Iris tests:
  - Baseline: Out-of-the-box SKLearn Random Forest = 97% validation accuracy.
  - SuperTML: ImageNet-pretrained ResNet34 = 97% validation accuracy (with and without initial frozen training)
  - SuperTML: Randomly initialised ResNet34 = 97% validation accuracy
  - SuperTML: ImageNet-pretrained ResNet34 and randomly shuffled targets of data. 23% validation accuracy (expected 33%) - indicates method does actually learn something during training, rather than memorising data.

- Wine tests:
  - Baseline: Out-of-the-box SKLearn Random Forest = 100% validation accuracy.
  - SuperTML: ImageNet-pretrained ResNet34 = 97% validation accuracy (without initial frozen training), 91% with initial frozen training (but compatible due to stats.)

- Double lumi. hypothesis (higgsml1_senet154_singlestage)
  - Ran as per best understanding of authors' model and data preparation techniques:
    - No event rotation or flipping, no changes to features (i.e. pT eta phi coord. system), no preprocessing
    - Trained on entire training dataset (no validation data)
    - 224x224 images with numerical text encoding
    - Trained SE-net 154 with no extra linear layers, extra dropout, or final batch norm. layer, no frozen pretraining
    - Assuming 0.5 cut (authors do not mention cut optimisation and have ignored by requests for clarification, so presume that they assign to highest class prediction), public | private AMS = 2.83 | 2.84
    - Maximum AMS on public and private achievable: 3.20 | 3.25
    - Assuming instead the entire testing dataset was used: AMS at cut of 0.5 is 4.00, compatible with claimed AMS of 3.979

## Requirements

- Python >= 3.6
- [fastai](https://github.com/fastai/fastai) > 1.0 - CNN training & inference
- [lumin](https://github.com/GilesStrong/lumin) == 0.2 - data processing, scoring
